Sorry about that.
My name is Melissa, and this is Sharon.
We are two of the developers working on Positron.
Through developing Positron, connecting with users in the GitHub repository,
and our own experiences using code editors,
we've gathered some tips and tricks to share with you today.
Our hope is that there's something in here for everyone,
whether you've yet to download Positron,
or you've been following along from the dailies from the beginning.
So we've broken the tips and tricks into three sections.
First, we'll cover navigating Positron
and a few ways you may want to personalize your coding space.
Then, we'll dive into how you can set yourself up
for a more pleasant data exploration experience
with a closer look at our editing and plotting tools.
And finally, we'll cover some tricks
on how to effectively pair with Positron's AI assistant,
currently available as a preview feature, Positron Assistant.
So let's start with personalizing your coding space.
We're going to cover how to effectively navigate through Positron
and configure your layout and settings.
We'll start out by familiarizing ourselves with the command palette.
The command palette is a text-driven interface
that allows you to access almost any action that's possible in Positron.
It's your gateway to finding and running any command
without clicking through menus or memorizing keyboard shortcuts.
It's fuzzy searchable,
so even if you don't remember the name of a command
or you aren't sure what commands are available,
you can type a few letters or words and see what your options are.
This feature will allow you to quickly access
many of the other commands that we have to share with you today.
So if you're not already using the command palette
as part of your daily workflow, this is a really great habit to build
to help familiarize yourself with Positron.
All right, so let's start building that habit right away.
Let's open up the command palette
and run the command, welcome open walkthrough.
So we ran the command, welcome.
We're running the command, welcome open walkthrough.
And then we'll type migrating and select one of these walkthroughs.
Positron will open up one of these walkthroughs,
and these will provide step-by-step guidance
on how to get situated in Positron.
These are a great way to learn how to migrate
from VS Code or from RStudio.
Now if you're looking for, for example,
the four-pane data science layout,
which you may be familiar with from RStudio,
you can run the command, view stacked layout.
Once you do that, you'll be presented with your files,
your code editor, your variables, console,
and plots all in one view.
If you want even more customization,
you can run the command, customize layout,
or here we've searched for view layout,
and we've got all these other options for you to try out.
Next up, we'll jump over to the interpreter picker
in the top right of Positron.
The picker shows the interpreter for the active console session.
The active session provides the data you see in the variables pane.
The picker is especially helpful
when you have multiple console sessions going,
so you can tell which session is currently active.
Speaking of multiple sessions,
you can create them for various R and Python runtimes
by clicking on the plus button in the console.
If you click into the dropdown by the plus button,
you can select a different interpreter
if you don't want to use the active interpreter.
Now if you've got a few consoles going,
it can start to get confusing which console is for what.
So one of Isabelle's favorite features to renaming your console,
you can right-click on a console session to rename it,
and you can even include emojis if you want.
One more console tip.
There's this little info icon in the console,
and if you click on that,
you will get some metadata about the console,
like the interpreter path
or some quick links to relevant output channel logs.
And as Isabelle mentioned,
Ruby is going to be doing a lightning talk later today on multi-console,
so stay tuned for that if you want to learn more.
All right.
Up next we have key bindings.
You're likely already familiar with what a key binding is,
but just to review,
it's the association of a specific key
or a combination of keys with a command.
So to get to the key bindings UI,
you can run the command preferences open keyboard shortcuts,
and you can bind any command
that you can run through the command palette.
When you find yourself using the same command frequently,
you can check if a key binding exists
and add your own if it doesn't.
The simplest way to do this
is to use the keyboard shortcuts editor.
But for more granularity,
you may want to edit key bindings.json directly.
So you can do this by running the command
open keyboard shortcuts json.
In this example,
I'm taking advantage of a built-in command, run commands,
that allows you to chain together multiple commands
into a single key bindings.
Here I'm using the kill terminal and new terminal commands
to create a quick way to restart my terminal.
I'm using the when clause
so that the binding is only active when my focus is in the terminal,
leaving the key binding available for other scenarios as well.
So now we're going to move on to tips for exploring your data.
We'll start off by introducing the Data Explorer.
The interface is divided into a filter bar,
data grid, and summary panel.
The summary panel shows each column's name,
its data type, and the percentage of missing values,
and it even includes a small histogram.
And you can view data frames you've loaded
into your session variables,
but you can also click on your data file in the File Explorer,
and it will automatically open in the Data Explorer.
You can do this with compressed files as well,
no manual unzipping required.
What if I just want to see the raw CSV file?
Well, you're in luck,
because that is also as simple as the click of a button.
As we can see here, viewing your plain text file
just requires clicking here,
and you can easily open two tabs
and switch between the Data Explorer and raw text file.
The Data Explorer watches your source,
so any changes made to your CSV file will be reflected instantly.
So if you're interested in learning more about the Data Explorer,
stick around in this room.
Wes McKinney has a talk for exploring datasets in Positron.
All right.
Have you ever found yourself lost in a sea of editor tabs,
trying to find that one file?
You're scrolling back and forth through all the file tabs.
You're starting to forget which file you're even looking for.
Wouldn't it be nice if you could just pin the tabs
that you care about so much so you don't have to lose them?
Well, we've got some good news.
You can pin editor tabs.
They can be code files.
They can be the Settings tab.
They can be a Data Explorer that you want easy access to.
All you have to do is right-click on the Editor tab
and click Pin,
and those tabs will be pinned
to the beginning of your open editors.
So I really love this feature,
but sometimes I still feel like
I'm getting lost in a sea of editor tabs.
Well, okay.
Well, you may want to reevaluate the ones you really need
if you're pinning them,
but in the meantime, you can use this setting,
Pin Tabs on Separate Row.
So if you enable this,
you get a little bit more real estate,
and you get your pinned tabs above your other tabs.
Very nice.
Now on to plots.
Do you ever wish you could open up your plot in a larger space?
Maybe you want to see the Iris dataset in full screen.
You can do this by clicking on this little button here
in the Plots pane to open the plot in a new window
or an editor tab.
Now we're just going to do a spontaneous theme change,
so let's switch over to Positron Dark here.
Ooh, sharing.
My eyes.
What happened to the dark mode?
Oh, yeah.
Well, this is what you will get if you export this plot as an image,
but during your authoring and editing process,
we can de-ruin your dark mode
by clicking on this circle button in the Plots pane.
This allows you to configure
whether plots should have a filter applied to them.
By default, no filter is applied,
but you can configure this to follow your theme
or you can select a dark filter
if you are just super into dark plots all the time.
So let's go ahead and choose Follow Theme.
And all is well now.
Agreed. Much better.
With that, let's move on to talking about
effectively pairing with Positron Assistant.
Positron Assistant is an AI client
that provides LLM integration with Positron
through chat and inline completions.
It's great for helping with debugging, refactoring,
or getting suggestions for the next steps
that you should take in your project.
Two concepts that you should really understand
to make the best use of Assistant are context and tools.
Context refers to the information
that Positron Assistant provides to the LLM alongside your prompt.
Positron Assistant provides context about files and folders,
and it also provides your in-memory data from your session.
So this includes your loaded variables, plots pane,
active console sessions, and session state.
With your permission, Assistant can even run code
directly in your active session.
You can take advantage of this context
by asking Assistant to plot data frames for you
or tweak things like the title or access labels on your plots.
You can view what context Assistant is passing to the LLM
in your chat context.
So here we ask Assistant about the current plot
with the console session enabled as context.
Assistant has access to review the plot
as well as the code that generated the plot.
And you can see this because the open eye icon
is open next to the context.
What about closing the eye? What if we want it closed?
You can close the eye.
You can control exactly what context Assistant sends to the LLM.
So whether you have security concerns
or the context is just irrelevant to your prompt,
you can close your eye by clicking the eye icon.
So in this example, we've removed access
to the console session context.
Assistant is aware that you have a plot,
but it cannot see the plot
nor the code that generated the plot.
Providing relevant contextual information
can yield better results from AI models,
so there may be even more context
that you want to provide to Assistant.
You can do this by clicking add context
to attach additional context such as files and folders,
and you can even add additional interpreter sessions as well.
Much of this context is provided to the LLM
through tool calling.
So for example, if you ask a question
about the current plot,
Positron Assistant will call the get plot tool,
and that will allow the active plot image
to be included with your question.
Without the get plot tool,
the AI model isn't actually able to see your image.
If you want to check if Positron Assistant has called a tool,
you can keep an eye out for this green check mark
followed by some text describing an action.
So in this case, we have viewed the active plot.
By default, Positron will call tools
that seem relevant to your prompt,
but it can be helpful to attach tools as context.
So if you want Assistant to utilize specific tools
with your prompt,
you can click on add context in the chat,
and then tools,
and you'll be able to pick a tool to include as your context.
Let's now take a look at a couple other tools
available with Positron Assistant.
The get an R help page tool
looks at your current R session and loaded packages
and retrieves help and vignettes content for that package.
The AI model is then provided with this content
so that you can get guidance
directly based on the package's documentation.
Another tool Positron Assistant provides
is the get changed files tool,
which retrieves your file modifications from Git.
If you want to use this tool,
include hashtag changes in your message to Assistant.
So for example, here we've asked Assistant,
tell me about the hashtag changes I've made.
So if Assistant can understand my changes,
does that mean it can just write the commit message for me?
Yeah, you could ask Assistant,
generate a commit message for my hashtag changes in the chat,
or here we've added axolotl and kangaroo to our code,
and from the source control panel,
we've clicked the sparkles button in the commit message box,
and Positron Assistant has generated
the commit message for us.
Calling back to attach in context,
you can also select source control,
and this allows you to choose a specific commit
to include as context.
Sometimes, like, a lot of code can change in a commit
if you're, like, changing a bunch of files,
10,000 lines have changed,
or maybe it's just code that you're unfamiliar with,
so you can attach that commit as context
and then ask Assistant to help you understand
or summarize those changes.
With these tips in mind,
we welcome you to try out Positron Assistant,
which is currently in preview in Positron.
You'll need to enable the Positron Assistant enable setting,
so search for that in the settings UI
and check the checkbox,
and for more on Positron Assistant,
check out our docs at positron.posit.co.assistant.
All right, we went over a lot of tips and tricks today,
so if you did miss anything,
the slides will be uploaded post-conf,
so keep an eye out for that,
and to learn more about Positron at conf,
Austin's up next to talk about remote SSH in Positron
and Wes shortly after with a talk on the Data Explorer,
and here are a few other sessions and demos
you might be interested in for more Positron content,
so keep an eye out for that in the conf schedule,
and if you haven't seen it already,
there's a Positron lounge just outside this room
where the couches are
if you want a hands-on demo of Positron Assistant
or to chat with Positron devs,
and we'll be there as well.
All right, thank you, everyone, and open up for questions.
applause
Thank you so much.
I have a couple of questions here.
So when defining new key bindings,
the autocomplete helps find commands.
Where can I find the help slash description for that command,
including its arguments?
So just, I guess, general documentation
for the commands that are available,
if I'm interpreting that properly.
Oh, it's not on.
You know what, I'm going to join you on stage.
We can pass around the mic.
That should be on now.
Hello.
There we go.
Okay.
So if you're in Positron,
a good way to look for key bindings
is if you run the open up key bindings command.
There is a UI that Melissa showed earlier
where you can search for key bindings.
There's even a button that you can toggle,
and if you do a key binding like Command-C,
it will pull up all the commands that that corresponds to.
A lot of the commands that you can use
are ones that we've inherited from VS Code as well,
so VS Code documentation would be a great place
to look that up as well.
Awesome. Thank you.
So I have two related questions.
Can Positron Assistant be turned off,
and are there data leakage risks with Positron Assistant?
Do the LLMs have access to the underlying data,
or is that a feature that needs to be selected?
Yeah, so as Positron Assistant is currently in preview,
it is currently opt-in,
so it is disabled by default in builds of Positron.
So to enable it,
you'll have to enable the Positron Assistant enable setting,
and if you do have Positron Assistant enabled,
Melissa was talking about the open eye,
closed eye icon in the chat pane.
That allows you to include or exclude
your session context from your prompt.
Your session context will have things
like the code that you ran in your console,
the variables you have loaded in your environment,
so if that's not something you want to include,
you can disable your context,
and that won't be sent over to the LLM.
Great. We have lots of good questions here.
I'll try and get a couple more in.
So can you make keyboard shortcuts available to colleagues,
kind of like sharing preferences,
sharing key bindings?
Is it possible to share a preferences file
or something like that, or a key bindings file?
Yeah.
Yeah?
Yeah, so the key bindings JSON file?
Right, so you can add them to the key bindings.json file,
and I believe you can even include that in a project.
Is that right?
Oh, amazing.
Yeah, so there's a .vs code directory
that will get created if you create
the key bindings.json file in your project,
and if multiple people are checking out that same project
or you're sharing that project,
that will be available as part of that specific project.
Otherwise, your key bindings are at the user level,
so they'll be local to your machine.
Amazing. I think we can fit one more in.
So does Positron only allow R and Python coding?
Can extensions be used to introduce more interpreters
for other languages in the IDE?
Yep, so Positron's completely language agnostic,
so any of the VS code extensions or language packs
will work in Positron,
and yeah, that's one of the great things about it
is that it's not restricted to R and Python.
Amazing.
The only limitation is that the interpreter-specific UI components
like the interpreter picker or the console sessions,
those right now we only have support for R and Python.
Great. Thank you so much.
Thank you.
applause